Default theme viewer
This tree view allows you to explore how the theme object looks like with the default values.
Premium Templates. Start your project with the best templates for admins, dashboards, and more.
ad by MUI

If you want to learn more about how the theme is assembled, take a look at material-ui/style/createTheme.ts, and the related imports which createTheme() uses.

You can play with the documentation theme object in your browser console, as the theme variable is exposed on all the documentation pages.

Please note that the documentation site is using a custom theme (the MUI's organization branding).

Expand all
Use dark theme
breakpoints: Object
direction: "ltr"
components: Object
palette: Object
spacing: f r()
shape: Object
containerQueries: f n()
applyStyles: f n()
unstable_sxConfig: Object
unstable_sx: f ()
mixins: Object
shadows: Array(25)
typography: Object
transitions: Object
zIndex: Object
toRuntimeSource: f i()
alpha: f alpha()
lighten: f lighten()
darken: f darken()


Theming
Customize Material UI with your theme. You can change the colors, the typography and much more.
MUI for enterprise. Save time and reduce risk. Managed open source — backed by maintainers.
ad by MUI

The theme specifies the color of the components, darkness of the surfaces, level of shadow, appropriate opacity of ink elements, etc.

Themes let you apply a consistent tone to your app. It allows you to customize all design aspects of your project in order to meet the specific needs of your business or brand.

To promote greater consistency between apps, light and dark theme types are available to choose from. By default, components use the light theme type.

Theme provider

Material UI components adhere to the library's default theme out of the box. Use ThemeProvider to inject a custom theme into your application.

ThemeProvider relies on the context feature of React to pass the theme down to the components, so you need to make sure that ThemeProvider is a parent of the components you are trying to customize. You can learn more about this in the API section.

Theme configuration variables

Changing the theme configuration variables is the most effective way to match Material UI to your needs. The following sections cover the most important theme variables:

.palette
.typography
.spacing
.breakpoints
.zIndex
.transitions
.components
You can check out the default theme section to view the default theme in full.

Custom variables

When using Material UI's theme with MUI System or any other styling solution, it can be convenient to add additional variables to the theme so you can use them everywhere. For instance:

const theme = createTheme({
  status: {
    danger: orange[500],
  },
});

Copy
vars is an autogenerated field for CSS theme variables. It will throw an error if you try to pass a value to it:

createTheme({
  vars: { ... }, // ❌ error
})

Copy
TypeScript

You have to use module augmentation to add new variables to the Theme and ThemeOptions.

declare module '@mui/material/styles' {
  interface Theme {
    status: {
      danger: string;
    };
  }
  // allow configuration using `createTheme()`
  interface ThemeOptions {
    status?: {
      danger?: string;
    };
  }
}

Copy
<ThemeProvider theme={theme}>
  <CustomCheckbox defaultChecked />
</ThemeProvider>
<ThemeProvider theme={theme}>
  <CustomCheckbox defaultChecked />
</ThemeProvider>
Press Enter to start editing
To add extra variables to the theme.palette, see palette customization.

Theme builder

The community has built great tools to build a theme:

mui-theme-creator: A tool to help design and customize themes for the Material UI component library. Includes basic site templates to show various components and how they are affected by the theme
Material palette generator: The Material palette generator can be used to generate a palette for any color you input.
Accessing the theme in a component

You can access the theme variables inside your functional React components using the useTheme hook:

import { useTheme } from '@mui/material/styles';

function DeepChild() {
  const theme = useTheme();
  return <span>{`spacing ${theme.spacing}`}</span>;
}

Copy
Nesting the theme

You can nest multiple theme providers.

<ThemeProvider theme={outerTheme}>
  <Checkbox defaultChecked />
  <ThemeProvider theme={innerTheme}>
    <Checkbox defaultChecked />
  </ThemeProvider>
</ThemeProvider>
<ThemeProvider theme={outerTheme}>
  <Checkbox defaultChecked />
  <ThemeProvider theme={innerTheme}>
    <Checkbox defaultChecked />
  </ThemeProvider>
</ThemeProvider>
Press Enter to start editing
The inner theme will override the outer theme. You can extend the outer theme by providing a function:

CSS theme variables

To generate CSS variables from the theme, set cssVariables to true in the theme configuration and pass it to the ThemeProvider:

const theme = createTheme({
  cssVariables: true,
});

function App() {
  return <ThemeProvider theme={theme}>...</ThemeProvider>;
}

Copy
This generates a global stylesheet with the CSS theme variables:

:root {
  --mui-palette-primary-main: #1976d2;
  /* ...other variables */
}

Copy
All components under the ThemeProvider will use those CSS theme variables instead of raw values.

Button styles
- color: #1976d2;
+ color: var(--mui-palette-primary-main);

Copy
To learn more about this feature, see the CSS theme variables guide.

API

createTheme(options, ...args) => theme

Generate a theme base on the options received. Then, pass it as a prop to ThemeProvider.

Arguments
options (object): Takes an incomplete theme object and adds the missing parts.
...args (object[]): Deep merge the arguments with the about to be returned theme.
Only the first argument (options) is processed by the createTheme() function. While passing multiple arguments currently works for backward compatibility, this behavior may be removed in future versions. To ensure your code remains forward-compatible, you should manually deep merge the theme objects and pass the result as a single object to createTheme().

import { deepmerge } from '@mui/utils';
import { createTheme } from '@mui/material/styles';

const theme = createTheme(deepmerge(options1, options2));

Copy
Returns
theme (object): A complete, ready-to-use theme object.

Examples
import { createTheme } from '@mui/material/styles';
import { green, purple } from '@mui/material/colors';

const theme = createTheme({
  palette: {
    primary: {
      main: purple[500],
    },
    secondary: {
      main: green[500],
    },
  },
});

Copy
Theme composition: using theme options to define other options
When the value for a theme option is dependent on another theme option, you should compose the theme in steps.

import { createTheme } from '@mui/material/styles';

let theme = createTheme({
  palette: {
    primary: {
      main: '#0052cc',
    },
    secondary: {
      main: '#edf2ff',
    },
  },
});

theme = createTheme(theme, {
  palette: {
    info: {
      main: theme.palette.secondary.main,
    },
  },
});

Copy
Think of creating a theme as a two-step composition process: first, you define the basic design options; then, you'll use these design options to compose other options.

WARNING: theme.vars is a private field used for CSS variables support. Please use another name for a custom object.

Merging className and style props in defaultProps

By default, when a component has defaultProps defined in the theme, props passed to the component override the default props completely.

import { createTheme } from '@mui/material/styles';

const theme = createTheme({
  components: {
    MuiButton: {
      defaultProps: {
        className: 'default-button-class',
        style: { marginTop: 8 },
      },
    },
  },
});

// className will be: "custom-button-class" (default ignored)
// style will be: { color: 'blue' } (default ignored)
<Button className="custom-button-class" style={{ color: 'blue' }}>
  Click me
</Button>;

Copy
You can change this behavior by configuring the theme to merge className and style props instead of replacing them.

To do this, set theme.components.mergeClassNameAndStyle to true:

import { createTheme } from '@mui/material/styles';

const theme = createTheme({
  components: {
    mergeClassNameAndStyle: true,
    MuiButton: {
      defaultProps: {
        className: 'default-button-class',
        style: { marginTop: 8 },
      },
    },
  },
});

Copy
Here's what the example above looks like with this configuration:

// className will be: "default-button-class custom-button-class"
// style will be: { marginTop: 8, color: 'blue' }
<Button className="custom-button-class" style={{ color: 'blue' }}>
  Click me
</Button>

Copy
responsiveFontSizes(theme, options) => theme

Generate responsive typography settings based on the options received.

Arguments
theme (object): The theme object to enhance.
options (object [optional]):
breakpoints (array<string> [optional]): Default to ['sm', 'md', 'lg']. Array of breakpoints (identifiers).
disableAlign (bool [optional]): Default to false. Whether font sizes change slightly so line heights are preserved and align to Material Design's 4px line height grid. This requires a unitless line height in the theme's styles.
factor (number [optional]): Default to 2. This value determines the strength of font size resizing. The higher the value, the less difference there is between font sizes on small screens. The lower the value, the bigger font sizes for small screens. The value must be greater than 1.
variants (array<string> [optional]): Default to all. The typography variants to handle.
Returns
theme (object): The new theme with a responsive typography.

Examples
import { createTheme, responsiveFontSizes } from '@mui/material/styles';

let theme = createTheme();
theme = responsiveFontSizes(theme);

Copy
unstable_createMuiStrictModeTheme(options, ...args) => theme

WARNING: Do not use this method in production.

Generates a theme that reduces the amount of warnings inside React.StrictMode like Warning: findDOMNode is deprecated in StrictMode.

Requirements
Currently unstable_createMuiStrictModeTheme adds no additional requirements.

Arguments
options (object): Takes an incomplete theme object and adds the missing parts.
...args (object[]): Deep merge the arguments with the about to be returned theme.
Returns
theme (object): A complete, ready-to-use theme object.

Examples
import { unstable_createMuiStrictModeTheme } from '@mui/material/styles';

const theme = unstable_createMuiStrictModeTheme();

function App() {
  return (
    <React.StrictMode>
      <ThemeProvider theme={theme}>
        <LandingPage />
      </ThemeProvider>
    </React.StrictMode>
  );
}

Copy
ThemeProvider

This component takes a theme prop and applies it to the entire React tree that it is wrapping around. It should preferably be used at the root of your component tree.

Props
Name	Type	Description
children *	node	Your component tree.
theme *	union: object | func	A theme object, usually the result of createTheme(). The provided theme will be merged with the default theme. You can provide a function to extend the outer theme.
Examples
import * as React from 'react';
import { red } from '@mui/material/colors';
import { ThemeProvider, createTheme } from '@mui/material/styles';

const theme = createTheme({
  palette: {
    primary: {
      main: red[500],
    },
  },
});

function App() {
  return <ThemeProvider theme={theme}>...</ThemeProvider>;
}

